[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hello.
And welcome to the
"World of Wisdom."
My name is Linda Rachel.
And today we have, as a
special guest, Dr. David Myers.
Dr. Myers is an author of the
book "Heartful Parenting."
Dr. Myers, thank you so much
for visiting with us today.
>> I'm glad to be here.
Thank you for the opportunity.
>> Dr. Myers, you have a
PhD in clinical psychology,
and you're also a member
of the American Academy
of Psychotherapists.
And I noticed
that, recently, you
were a speaker at the Atlanta--
it was in Alabama, a governor's
conference on parenting.
>> I was the keynote
speaker at the Alabama
Governor's Conference.
>> Great.
Tell us some things that you
were talking to these governors
about.
>> Well, basically, the book
is about heartful parenting,
and that was my reason for
being the keynote speaker.
The idea was to tie-in the
idea of heartful parenting
with emotional intelligence,
emotional intelligence
being the concept of
empathy, self-awareness,
self motivation, and
social effectiveness.
And so there were
many parents there,
along with
professionals, who wanted
to hear about the connections.
And so I was glad to be
there to give them that talk.
>> And in what respect do you
feel that this is a different
approach from your other
fellow workers in your field?
>> Generally, the books, as
well as other professionals,
have a tendency to focus on
behavior, behavior being,
what does my child do?
Does my child go to school?
Does my child get good grades?
Does my child perform well
in athletics, and so on.
The difference in
heartful parenting
is that we're concerned about
what happens inside the child
and how those inside
happenings connect
with the insides of the parent.
Heartfulness has to do with
being fully there, fully
experience.
If you're just concentrating
on the behavior
of the child or the parent,
what you're focusing on
is just the external.
What we want to do is look on
the insides, the processing,
what makes the child alive,
what makes the parent alive,
and how those two
sets of pieces come
together so that there is
a connection between parent
and child.
Then there's a fullness
to the parenting process
rather than just the parent
telling a child, one up,
one down, what to do, what
not to do, and how to do it.
>> So do you think that there
is a certain soulfulness that is
in parenting?
>> There's an incredible
soulfulness in parenting.
When children come into the
world, there's a natural bond.
But if we, as parents,
begin to emphasize
achievement and
external behavior,
we tend to minimize that bond.
We may realize that
bond is later on,
but the child doesn't
get to experience
that on a daily basis.
The parent doesn't experience
it in on a daily basis.
Life becomes sort of bland,
empty, and shell-like.
So what we want to do for
the child and the parent
is have a soulful connection
so that the hearts connect,
and there's aliveness
around emotionality.
>> Well, do you think that
sometimes we, our society,
sets us up for this
achievement orientation.
In school, certain things are
to be achieved by that child.
And for the parent
in their own work,
certain things are
to be achieved.
And we don't really get down
to that true soulfulness
or what the person feels inside.
So when we come
home and the group
is there, the parent
and the child,
we don't even communicate at
that level of soulfulness.
We still are saying,
what did you do?
Did you do this correctly?
Or did you perform very well?
Is that what you're saying?
>> Our major thrust in this
society has to do with money.
Money comes around
achievement, if you're
a great baseball player, a
basketball player, or whatever,
a engineer.
So, yeah, what we
need to do is balance
that so that we can become
more effective athletics
or effective vocationally,
and so on, by using what's
inside as emotional resources.
We usually know in our
heads what we need to do.
But if we don't have
that energy, that
aliveness to put the drive into
it to be self-motivated to know
what to do, then you
become kind of a robot,
an automaton of the society and
become achievement-oriented.
And then there's an
emptiness that sets in.
And people use drugs
and alcohol, and so on.
Or they become
achievement-oriented
alcoholics, if you will, and try
to replace that emptiness, that
heartfulness with
doing the extra mile.
>> So there are a lot of
people, parents in particular,
who are very successful
maybe in their careers,
but they feel very empty.
>> Exactly.
The divorce rate in
America is quite high.
Our alcohol rates
are quite high.
And we could just go
on with statistics.
But we all know that because
of this craziness, if you will,
people are turning
to spirituality.
They are more and more, in
droves, wanting something
that's transcendent to get
beyond this normal, everyday
achievement orientation.
>> So do you think it's
possible then for us as we go
into the year 2000 to have
a concept of spirituality
and psychology together?
>> Yes, very much so.
And 2000 may be the millennium
that sets this all apart.
And we know that it's a
marker and that things are
happening faster and faster.
But inside, we're
still struggling with,
how are we going
to be different?
How are we going
to be more alive?
How are we going to
be more connected?
We also know that the earth
is having some difficulties.
Many people are becoming
very aware of global warming,
for example.
And our connection has to
be with our Mother Earth.
If we're not connected and
we destroy Mother Earth,
we end up with more diseases,
such as cancer, and so on.
We've got to be very
careful about being
connected with the all.
>> So whether or not we're
talking about a global
consciousness or we're talking
about consciousness within
the environment of our home,
it has to start within our own
hearts then.
>> And it projects outward.
>> Right.
How do you think that we can
build this kind of connection
with our children?
You talk about a secret
ingredient to success
is connectedness.
How do we do that?
>> Well, first of all, we
have to think about what
connectedness means.
Connectedness means that I
feel inside the energies that
occur inside of me, and
I also feel the energies
of those people around me.
I don't have a big glass
wall that separates me
from the rest of the world.
As a function of
nurturing connectedness,
I'm going to pay
attention to how
I am, what I do with
who I am, and how
I block my emotional
energies, how I
nurture my emotional energies.
I then am going to use that
knowledge and that energy
to connect with my child to
become very inquisitive, very
nurturing, very
expressive about who
I am so that my children become
expressive about who they are.
I serve as a role model.
Our children learn from
us based on what we do.
By having that connection,
by encouraging that
from very, very
early, even preverbal,
feeling the energies,
and allowing my child
to feel my energies and not be
frightened by that intensity,
I'm encouraging connectedness.
>> Children seem to
be very perceptive.
You know, they'll say,
what's wrong, Mommy?
And then the mommy
says, oh, nothing.
What are we teaching our
children when we do that?
>> That's my version
of craziness.
Craziness is distorting reality.
We know that we're
feeling something.
Our child must be
feeling something
in order to ask that question.
Let's honor the moment.
Let's stay connected
with, she must
be asking me that for a reason.
Even if I'm not
aware that there's
something uncomfortable,
let me use that
as a moment of self-awareness.
Ah, my child has asked
me, what's wrong?
Maybe I need to
take a quick look,
or maybe I know, and
share that in a way
that my child will understand.
It's a tricky tight-wire rope
to walk that we don't overwhelm
our children with
too much information,
but we give them
enough information that
validates their experience.
And they are so open,
and they're so receptive.
And we don't want to do
anything to discourage that.
We want to encourage them
to use it constructively.
>> So do you feel like maybe
we are blocking some of this,
our own emotionality?
And so that's why,
as parents, it's
difficult to share
with our children
because we've
blocked it ourselves.
>> Many of us grew up in an age
where children were to be seen
and not heard.
Many of our parents were
of that Depression age
where we needed to get on with
getting food on the table.
We needed to go to work.
We needed to get things done.
So that was then
passed on to us.
Or the other thing that
sometimes was passed on to us
was the nature of
permissiveness.
Again, we're back to
walking a tight-wire rope.
As a result of
our childhoods, we
have to go back and
recollect those aspects
that we may have left behind
because of our parent's
inadequacies.
There's no such thing
as a perfect parent.
Parents are vulnerable.
They have their own histories,
and they project that
onto their children.
So by doing the introspective
work, we can reverse that path
and take a more balanced path.
>> Do you think so many people
who become parents really are
just instinctually relying on
what their parents taught them?
>> I don't know if we want
to call it instinctual,
but they do operate
out of what they know.
They've been in a habit path.
My mother did this.
Therefore, I'm going to do this.
Or the opposite, which
is sort of the same--
my mother did this, so I'm going
to do the opposite of that.
And that's where
this whole business
of whether a parent's too
strict or too permissive
ties into what
their parents did.
Well, it was good enough for
me, and look how I turned out.
But that belies who
our children are.
We are not our children.
We have to respond
to them individually,
who they are, their
temperaments, what
they're going through.
That's a very different
time than the time
that we grew up in.
And so we have to honor that
this is now, and that was then.
>> So it's not just a matter of
a course that could have been
taken 20 years ago or a
course that you can take now,
but it's actually being alive
in the moment with that child.
>> That's one of the aspects
of emotional intelligence--
self-awareness.
What's happening now?
And how is that different?
>> Right.
Well, you said in your
book that you've learned
a lot from your own children.
And I'd like to talk to
you a little bit more
about that when we come back.
>> OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Welcome back to
the "World of Wisdom."
I'm Linda Rachel.
And we have as our guest
today Dr. David Myers.
Dr. Myers' book is
"Heartful Parenting--
Connecting Parenting and
Emotional Intelligence."
Dr. Myers, it's nice
to have you with us.
When we went to break, we were
talking about your own children
have taught you some
important lessons.
It seems like, many
times, children
are very open and honest
about their feelings, I guess,
until they unlearn
those things--
>> Exactly, yeah.
>> --from us as parents.
What are some things that
your children have taught you?
>> There were two very
significant experiences.
One was when our
family dog died.
I rounded up the children,
placed them in my lap,
and encouraged them to cry
and have all their feelings
about the loss of their
dog, and my dog as well.
And what I served was was kind
of the encouraging, nurturing
father.
And I noticed that
they did their work.
And then about 30, 40 minutes
later, they were off playing,
and it was if it
had not happened.
They processed it.
I then notice that I had
gone into a depression
and realized, two weeks later,
that the work that my children
had done, I had not done.
Once I repeated that release
work that they had done,
the loss of that
dog just went away.
It was a remarkable lesson
in blocking versus releasing.
So that was one lesson.
The other lesson
was my youngest son
was very interested
in racquetball.
And I have been an avid
racquetball player myself.
And I noticed that if I became
too excited about racquetball,
he would sort of diminish.
And then as I would
back off, he would
start coming back and being
very excited about it.
And if I would get
overly excited,
he'd start backing off.
And I noticed two things then.
One was that I was reliving
my childhood through my son.
And he was giving me
a wonderful lesson--
don't relive your
childhood through me.
The other was that I needed
to match my energies with his
and not overwhelm
him with who I was.
Those were two
great lessons that
come through in the book
in a lot of other ways.
>> I think it's very
difficult to, as a parent,
to let your child
have their own space,
and even for spouses to
give each other space.
How important is that
in the family structure?
>> It's incredibly important
to have a balance between space
and connectedness.
Otherwise, you're either
overwhelming this person
with invading them, or
you're becoming isolated.
One way that this
balance is achieved
is through communication.
I'm needing some space.
You're overwhelming me-- so
that we're talking about not
just in terms of what
the other person does,
but what I'm having happening
inside of my own experience.
So I can simply say
something like, I'm
feeling overwhelmed now.
I'm feeling pressured now.
Or I would like to have
some more of your time,
or I'd like to have some
more of your attention--
so that we're into a
relationship-oriented
discussion as opposed to
I'm going to have my way,
and you're not.
The book is about
relationship-oriented parenting
as opposed to
objective-oriented parenting.
What we do then is
learn from our children,
and our children learn from us
rather than our children being
sort of our property
that we're going
to mold into whatever we think
we're going to mold them into.
It doesn't work.
>> Well, it seems like we
have to have a little bit
of vulnerability as a parent
in order to have that sort
of relationship
with your children.
>> Extremely vulnerable.
And it's important that our
children understand that we
don't have all the answers.
We can protect our children.
They need to know that.
But in terms of complete
knowledge of the world,
complete ability to connect, and
so on, we're learning as well.
Life then becomes a journey
rather than a finished product.
>> Well, do you think that as
parents it's important to let
your children know
when you've been wrong?
>> Very much so.
None of us are perfect.
The idea of
perfectionism, I think,
is still being toyed with.
But I know I didn't live
up to that expectation
of being perfect.
Our children need to
learn that they don't
have to be perfect either.
And the opposite of perfection
is being on a journey,
exploring and learning.
Otherwise, you're
just building in what
I call negative self-esteem.
I didn't do it right.
There must be something
wrong with me.
We need to be very careful as
parents to inculcate or nurture
the idea that we
do make mistakes.
What's important is that
we stay on the road.
We go for the path.
But we pay attention
to the processing
of the emotional energies
while we're on that path.
>> Well, you talk about
emotional energies.
All of our emotions, we have
such a gambit of emotions,
from sadness and
sorrow to anger.
And it is, seems like
it is, a strong energy.
>> It's a very strong energy.
And it moves mountains
if we want it to.
And the mountains can be
great that we want to move.
And that's a
distinction that I make
in the chapter on emotionality.
We can use our emotionality
constructively,
or we can use it destructively.
Most of us get caught up in
being fearful of the intensity.
It isn't the intensity
that hurts other people.
It's what we do
with the intensity.
When people hit another
person out of anger,
that's destructive.
If I'm angry and
I go off and think
about what I'm going to do
with my anger as opposed
to hurting someone else, coming
back and saying, I'm angry.
Here's why I'm angry.
Can we talk about that?
Then we've done
something constructive.
We're then working on the
relationship as opposed to,
I'm angry, and I'm going
to make you do right.
And there's too
much of that "I'm
going to make you do
right" stuff in parenting.
It's a relationship.
We, as parents, do serve
as the upper echelon.
I don't want to take that
away from the parenthood.
But on the other
hand, we must not
lose sight that our children
are learning human individuals.
They're not just going
to live out our path.
They're not just going to
be molded in our image.
We don't even want that, I hope.
>> I heard the other
day someone say, well,
when you talk about
dysfunctional family,
that's a word you hear a lot.
Someone will say,
well, are there
really any functional families?
Are we not all
dysfunctional in some way?
>> It depends on who you ask,
and it depends on the kind
of dysfunction.
But I think in terms of
the general orientation
towards achievement versus
relationship orientation,
we tend to err on the
side of achievement.
And from that angle, I think
we have a bit of dysfunction
or a lot of
dysfunction depending
on how much achievement
orientation we have.
It runs on a continuum.
>> It seems difficult
for children and parents,
many times, to communicate
with each other,
even if they do find a time and
space when they're together,
actually together
as a family unit,
to actually have downtime.
Do you think the fact that
the technology that we have
and the busy lives that
we have is taking away
from this relationship?
>> Clearly, our technological
orientation is a distraction.
Who we really are
is on the inside.
We've known that spiritually
for thousands of years.
And it's important
to balance all
this technological external
stuff with who are we
on the inside and to
connect with the insides
of that other person.
That's where we really
have the meaning of life.
And we have soulfulness
and a full experience
that goes way beyond whatever
I can have at the computer.
I love playing at the computer.
But it's not like having
a soulful, enlightening
experience where I
pick up something
that has been left behind,
for whatever reason,
and put it into my
soul again, and use
it to be more energized.
10 years ago, I might
not even be here
having this interview with
you if I had been stuck back
at that spot.
>> Well, I guess there are a
lot of vehicles or, let's say,
resources to help us
through our communities,
through the schools,
and through churches,
and through community
organizations.
But many times, it does come
right back to the parent.
The parent is responsible
for that nurturing process.
>> I see it that way.
It starts in the home.
And what the child
learns in home
then generalizes
out into school.
So if a child doesn't have
that solid foundation,
they may get distracted at
school or with whatever outside
of school.
School clearly is a
powerful influence.
I don't want to take that
away from how powerful school
can be in the peer-group
relationships.
But if the child doesn't
have a foundation that's
really solid of
connecting to, here's me.
Here's not me.
Here's what's good for me.
Here's what's not good for me--
then they become that
much more vulnerable
once they reach the school age.
>> Well, what does a parent
do when they find themselves
in a situation where their
children are in trouble
in school, or they've gotten
in with the wrong crowd,
or they've gotten into drugs?
What does the parent
do at that point?
>> They start with beginning
to express their discomfort,
their concern, their sense of
how things have moved beyond
where they've been, or
that they've just moved
in a direction that
doesn't feel good to them,
and to begin to explore
with their children,
how that affects
the relationship,
and how they're concerned
about what it might be doing
for their child.
And at that point in time, they
can then explore the community
resources.
And maybe just knowing,
from the child's standpoint,
hey, my parents are so
concerned that we're going
to explore community resources.
Let's stay with
what's really me.
Let's go back to
I've seen it happen
over and over again
where a child is
brought to an office,
and just that one
visit will say,
hey, let's take a look
at what's going on here
and start on another path.
>> So in other words,
they might bring the child
to the therapist to
supposedly fix that child,
and then it actually
brings it back full circle.
>> Right.
We don't fix children.
We sure don't.
And I don't think
parents fix children.
It's just a matter of
exploring, what's going wrong?
Where is the emotional
energy being blocked?
And how can we use
this emotional energy
and achievement orientation to
go in a different direction?
>> Thank you so much for
visiting with us, Dr.
David Myers.
>> I was very
pleased to be here.
>> Thank you.